Introduction

Every  author,  I  suppose, has in mind a setting in which readers of his or her
work  could  benefit  from  having  read  it.  Mine  is  the  proverbial  office
watercooler, where opinions are shared and gossip is exchanged. I hope to enrich
the vocabulary that people use when they talk about the judgments and choices of
others,  the  company s new policies, or a colleague s investment decisions. Why
be  concerned  with  gossip?  Because  it  is  much  easier, as well as far more
enjoyable,  to  identify  and label the mistakes of others than to recognize our
own. Questioning what we believe and want is difficult at the best of times, and
especially  difficult  when  we  most need to do it, but we can benefit from the
informed opinions of others. Many of us spontaneously anticipate how friends and
colleagues  will  evaluate  our  choices;  the  quality  and  content  of  these
anticipated  judgments  therefore matters. The expectation of intelligent gossip
is  a  powerful  motive  for serious self-criticism, more powerful than New Year
resolutions to improve one s decision making at work and at home.

To  be  a good diagnostician, a physician needs to acquire a large set of labels
for  diseases,  each  of  which  binds  an idea of the illness and its symptoms,
possible  antecedents  and  causes,  possible developments and consequences, and
possible  interventions  to  cure  or  mitigate  the  illness. Learning medicine
consists in part of learning the language of medicine. A deeper understanding of
judgments  and  choices  also  requires a richer vocabulary than is available in
everyday  language.  The  hope for informed gossip is that there are distinctive
patterns  in  the errors people make. Systematic errors are known as biases, and
they  recur  predictably  in  particular  circumstances.  When  the handsome and
confident  speaker  bounds  onto the stage, for example, you can anticipate that
the  audience  will  judge  his  comments  more  favorably than he deserves. The
availability of a diagnostic label for this bias the halo effect makes it easier
to anticipate, recognize, and understand.

When  you  are  asked  what you are thinking about, you can normally answer. You
believe  you  know  what  goes  on  in  your  mind,  which often consists of one
conscious thought leading in an orderly way to another. But that is not the only
way  the  mind  works,  nor indeed is that the typical way. Most impressions and
thoughts  arise  in  your conscious experience without your knowing how they got
there.  You  cannot trace how you came to the belief that there is a lamp on the
desk  in front of you, or how you detected a hint of irritation in your spouse s
voice  on the telephone, or how you managed to avoid a threat on the road before
you  became  consciously aware of it. The mental work that produces impressions,
intuitions, and many decisions goes on in silence in our mind.